JOB MANTRA … By R. D. Sir (ARO 2021,LOWER PCS 2019)

पाषाण काल (विविन्न प्रवियोगी परीक्षा में आये हुए प्रश्नों का िन लाइनर फाम)
Q. In which age was copper first used?
A. In the Chalcolithic Age.

Q. When were the caves of Bhimbetka discovered?
A. In 1957-58.

Q. For what are the rock shelters of Bhimbetka famous?
A. For Palaeolithic rock paintings in India.

Q. What is the correct chronological order of the prehistoric periods of human activity and
civilization?
A. Palaeolithic Age, Mesolithic Age, Neolithic Age.

Q. What is the correct west-to-east sequence of Mesolithic sites geographically?
A. Mahadaha, Lekhahia, Paisra, Birbhanpur.

Q. What is the site from where the earliest evidence of a permanent life has been found?
A. Mehrgarh.

Q. From where have the earliest pieces of evidence of rice cultivation been found in the
Ganga Valley?
A. Lahuradeva.

Q. From which Mesolithic site have the pieces of evidence of animal husbandry been found?
A. From Bagor.

Q. From which site have the pieces of evidence of animal husbandry been found in the
Mesolithic period?
A. From Adamgarh.

Q. According to excavated evidence, in which period did animal husbandry begin?
A. The Mesolithic Age.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>



Q. In which period did the cultivation of grains first begin?
A. The Neolithic Age.

Q. From where have the remains of Neolithic pit-dwellings been found?
A. Burzahom and Gufkral.

Q. The Ash Mound, a Neolithic site, is related to which place?
A. Sanganakallu.

Q. From where has the earliest evidence of rice cultivation been found in the Indian
subcontinent?
A. The Vindhya region.

Q. What was the first grain used by humans?
A. Barley.

Q. Where did the cultivation of cotton for clothes first begin?
A. In India.

Q. Megalithic monuments have been identified as what?
A. As burial sites for the dead.

Q. From where have three human skeletons been found in a single grave?
A. Damdama.

Q. Which is the rock shelter in the Vindhya region from where the maximum number of
human skeletons have been found?
A. Lekhahia.

Q. Where in India is the rock shelter from which the maximum number of paintings have
been found?
A. Bhimbetka.

Q. Where is the Chalcolithic site of Navdatoli located?

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


A. In Madhya Pradesh.

Q. From where did the name 'Ochre-Coloured Pottery' originate?
A. Hastinapur.

Q. Which is the site in India from whose excavation the earliest pieces of evidence of iron
have been found?
A. Atranjikhera.

Q. In the Chalcolithic Age, in which direction did the people of Maharashtra bury the dead?
A. From north to south.

Q. Who established the three-age system of Stone, Bronze, and Iron based on the materials
from the Copenhagen Museum?
A. Thomsen.

Q. Who was Robert Bruce Foote, the discoverer of the first Palaeolithic tool in India?
A. A geologist.

Q. Who excavated the Chalcolithic site of Navdatoli?
A. H.D. Sankalia.

Q. Why are the caves of Bhimbetka famous?
A. For rock paintings.

Q. The archaeological site of Damdama is related to which period?
A. The Mesolithic Age.

Q. Bhimbetka, a famous Palaeolithic site, is located in which Indian state?
A. Madhya Pradesh.

Q. In which period of ancient Indian history were clay pots discovered?
A. In the Neolithic Age.

Q. Which prehistoric site provides archaeological evidence of cattle rearing?

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


A. Mahagara.

Q. What were the microliths used by early humans?
A. Stone tools.

Q. Which is a Palaeolithic site of archaeological importance in India?
A. Hunsagi.

Q. What is a Celt?
A. A Neolithic tool.

Q. What is the first age of the prehistoric period called?
A. The Palaeolithic Age.

Q. At which archaeological site has evidence of pit-dwellings been found?
A. Burzahom.

Q. Mehrgarh, a Neolithic settlement, is located in which province of Pakistan?
A. Balochistan.

Q. Where is the archaeological site of Inamgaon located?
A. In Maharashtra.

Q. Where is the archaeological site of Koldihwa located?
A. In Uttar Pradesh.

Q. At which prehistoric Indian site was the skull of 'Homo erectus' found?
A. Hathnora.

व िंधु घाटी की भ्यिा (विविन्न प्रवियोगी परीक्षा में आये हुए प्रश्नों का िन लाइनर फाम)
 A port of the Harappan civilization: Lothal
 Daderi is a late Harappan site: Punjab
 What was exported from the Indus Civilization: Cotton clothes
 The technique used for the 'Dancing Girl' statue: Lost-wax casting
 The Harappan city divided into three parts: Dholavira

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The site not related to the Indus Valley Civilization: Pataliputra
 'Mohenjo-daro' means: Mound of the Dead
 The first to produce cotton were: The Indus people
 Excavation of Lothal was discovered by: S.R. Rao
 Remains of horse bones were found at: Surkotada
 Shells for craft production were obtained from: Nageshwar
 The Indus Valley Civilization site in Punjab (India) is: Ropar
 Most standard Harappan seals were made of: Steatite
 The Great Bath at Mohenjo-daro was a massive: Rectangular tank
 The city of Harappa was found on the banks of the river: Ravi
 Mohenjo-daro is located in: Sindh
 The Harappan city dedicated to craft production was: Chanhudaro
 Dholavira is located in the state of: Gujarat
 Dholavira is associated with the period of: Indus Valley Civilization
 Evidence of reservoirs has been found at: Dholavira
 He became the Director General of ASI in 1944 and took charge of Harappa
excavation: Sir Mortimer Wheeler
 Mohenjo-daro was first excavated by: R.D. Banerji
 The Harappan civilization developed around 2500 B.C. in: Western India and
Pakistan
 Indian history begins with the Indus Valley Civilization, which came into existence
around: 2500 BC
 The most important feature of the Indus Valley Civilization was: Buildings made of
bricks
 The people of the Indus civilization mixed copper and tin to make: Bronze
 The animal often seen on Harappan seals was: Bull
 The bronze statue of 'Dancing Girl' was found at: Mohenjo-daro
 The name 'Mohenjo-daro' means 'Mound of the Dead' in: Sindhi
 The people of the Indus Valley Civilization worshipped: Pashupati
 The Harappan site 'Banawali' is located in: Haryana
 The remains of ancient Indian culture are in Pakistan: Harappa, Mohenjo-daro
 The nature of society in the Indus Valley Civilization was: Urban
 Evidence of water conservation has been found at: Dholavira
 The Harappan site Mandi is located in: Uttar Pradesh
 Models of boats have been found at: Mohenjo-daro and Lothal

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The animal not depicted on the 'Pashupati Shiva' seal from Mohenjo-daro is: Bull
 The eastern-most boundary of the Harappan culture is marked by: Alamgirpur
 The figure of a horned deity on a terracotta plaque was found at: Kalibangan
 An ivory scale was found at: Lothal
 The first archaeologist to excavate Harappa and understand its significance was: Sir
John Marshall
 The term 'Indus Civilization' was first used by: Sir John Marshall
 What sheds light on the Indus Valley Civilization: Archaeological excavations
 Indus Civilization sites in Uttar Pradesh are: Alamgirpur and Hulas
 The Harappan site Sopal is located in: Gujarat
 Evidence of rock-cut architecture has been found at: Dholavira
 A ploughed field was discovered at: Kalibangan
 The largest Harappan site in India is: Rakhigarhi
 Most of the Harappan sites are located in: Indus Valley
 The beginning of idol worship is believed to be from: Pre-Aryan period
 The main source of information about the Harappan culture is: Archaeological
excavations
 Avesta is related to the region of: Iran
 The earliest evidence of cotton cultivation in India was found at: Mehrgarh
 A clay model of a plough was found at the site of: Banawali
 Evidence of a coffin burial has been found at the site of: Harappa
 The maximum number of Harappan sites were discovered in India after independence
in: Gujarat
 Archaeologists found the remains of five wild dogs and antlers of a stag at: Burzahom
 'Jorwe Culture' was a Chalcolithic site located in the state of: Maharashtra
 The site of archaeological importance in Jammu & Kashmir is: Burzahom
 A port has been found in the city of the Indus Valley Civilization at: Lothal
 The 'Great Bath' was found at the site of: Mohenjo-daro
 The Harappan site located in Afghanistan is: Shortughai
 The 'Mahasnangara' at Mohenjo-daro was made waterproof by applying a layer of:
Natural charcoal
 About 2500 years ago, the Indus River was called by the Iranians as: Hindos
 The prehistoric site Daimabad is located in the state of: Maharashtra
 The city related to the Harappan civilization is: Dholavira

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The people of the Harappan civilization got metal from the present-day Rajasthan area:
Copper
 Terracotta models of the plough were found at: Banawali
 Excavations in Dholavira were started in 1990 by: Ravindra Singh Bisht
 The ancient Harappan settlements of Dholavira and Lothal are located in the state of:
Gujarat
 Marks of ploughed lines were discovered at: Kalibangan
 The Mesopotamian language was not: Sumerian (Note: This is incorrect, Sumerian
was a Mesopotamian language)
 The Harappan site not located in Pakistan is: Dholavira (Note: Shortughai is in
Afghanistan, not Pakistan)
 The Harappan site Rangpur is located in the state of: Gujarat
 The rooms in the houses of the Indus Valley Civilization were generally built around:
A courtyard
 Fire altars of the Harappan culture were found at: Lothal
 The Mesopotamian people called the Indus Valley Civilization: Meluha
 Unlike other Harappan cities, Dholavira was divided into: Three parts
 The Harappan site in Haryana is: Rakhigarhi
 The 'dancing-girl' was made using the material of: Bronze
 The archaeological site Daimabad is located on the bank of the river: Pravara
 The Harappan site located in India is: Daimabad
 The Indus Valley Civilization site not located on the banks of the Indus river is: Ropar
 A mature phase Harappan site located in Rajasthan is: Kalibanga
 Evidence of a ploughed field has been found at: Kalibanga
 The old Persian word used to refer to the area east of the Indus was: Hindu
 What is the Upanayana ceremony: A sacred thread is put on the child for education
 What was the status of women in the Vedic period: High


Vedic sabhyata (विविन्न प्रवियोगी परीक्षा में आये हुए प्रश्नों का िन लाइनर फाम)

 The 'Upanayana ceremony' means: The child is made to wear the sacred thread.
 The status of women in the Vedic period was: High.
 The first Veda among the four Vedas is: Rigveda.
 Idol worship started in India: Even before the period of the Aryans.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The basis for the division of society in the Early Vedic period was: Profession.
 The phrase 'Satyameva Jayate' is taken from: The Mundaka Upanishad.
 The oldest Hindu epic is: Ramayana.
 What explains the philosophy and principles of the Aryans: Upanishads.
 The social practice symbolic only of the Rigvedic period is: Dowry system.
 The grain for which the word 'Vrihi' was used in the Vedic period was: Rice.
 The great saying 'Satyameva Jayate' is quoted from: Mundakopanishad.
 The prose sections of the Vedas are called: Brahmanas.
 What emphasizes the principle of 'knowledge' is: Upanishads.
 In Rigveda, the greatest importance is given to the deity: Indra.
 The oldest Veda is: Rigveda.
 The ancient Indian text in which crime and criminal are mentioned is: Arthashastra,
Manusmriti, Nyaya Mimamsa.
 Shatapatha Brahmana and Taittiriya Brahmana are the Brahmana original texts of:
Yajurveda.
 The Vedic deity Indra is the god of: Rain and cyclone.
 In Hinduism, the deity considered the "lord of plants, healer of diseases and giver of
wealth" is: Soma.
 The Gayatri Mantra in the Rigveda is dedicated to: Savita.
 The oldest Purana is: Matsya Purana.
 The one that is not an Upaveda is: Yogveda.
 Brihadaranyaka, Mundaka, and Taittiriya are examples of: Upanishads.
 The main philosophical ideology of Hinduism is: Vaisheshika Darshana.
 It is known as a 'Karmakanda Grantha' or ritual text: Yajurveda.
 The branches of Yajurveda are: 2.
 According to Vedic texts, the function of 'Sangrahitri' was: Of a treasurer or cashier.
 In Hinduism, the deity considered to be the creator is: Brahma.
 The Aitareya Upanishad is related to: Rigveda.
 The holiest Veda among the four Vedas is: Rigveda.
 The number of hymns is highest in: Rigveda (1,028).
 The oldest and largest Veda among the four Vedas is: Rigveda.
 The stages of life are prescribed in early Hindu philosophy: Four.
 The Veda known as the Veda of 'Yajna' formulas is: Yajurveda.
 The word 'upa' in the word Upanishad denotes: Nearness.
 The hymns of the Rigveda are also known as: Sukta.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Veda also called the "Book of Songs" is: Samaveda.
 The oldest Veda is: Rigveda.
 The number of hymns in the Rigveda is: 1028.
 The 'Anga' of the Vedangas famous for the meaning and interpretation of complex
words is: Nirukta.
 India's national motto 'Satyameva Jayate' is a mantra quoted from:
Mundakopanishad.
 Dhanurveda, the Upaveda of Yajurveda, is related to: The art of warfare.
 The knowledge related to music is contained in: Samaveda.
 The names of the four Vedas are: Rigveda, Samaveda, Yajurveda, and
Atharvaveda.
 The Mundaka Upanishad is related to: Atharvaveda.
 The Vedic period of India lasted until: 1500-500 BC.
 What talks about magical rituals and charms is: Atharvaveda.
 In 'Yajurveda', 'Yajur' means: Sacrifice.
 The Veda that gives treatment for diseases is: Atharvaveda.
 The word 'Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam' is mentioned in the Upanishad: Maha
Upanishad.
 The number of main Upanishads is: 11.
 The oldest Upanishad is: Chandogya Upanishad.
 According to early Indian philosophers, every object is made of: 5 basic elements.
 The male deity of the Rigvedic era, the god of plants was: Soma.
 The main source of livelihood of the Aryans in ancient times was: Agriculture and
animal husbandry.
 The five characteristics of the Puranas are mentioned in: The Matsya Purana.
 'Ashtaka' is also called: Rigveda.
 The one that is not a 'Vedanga' is: Smriti.
 In the Vedic period, 'Bhagaduha' was an officer who: Collected revenue tax.
 The text in which the word 'Ayurveda' is used is: Atharvaveda.
 The nickname of the Mahabharata text is: Shatasahasri-Samhita.
 The famous Gayatri Mantra is first found in: Rigveda.
 The original script of the Rigveda was: Brahmi.
 The compilation based on the Rigveda is: Samaveda.
 The Rigvedic religion was: Polytheistic.
 In the Rigvedic period, the people believed in: Sacrifice and rituals.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The word 'Gotra' was first used in: Rigveda.
 The highest number of hymns in Rigveda are related to: Indra.
 The oldest Veda is: Rigveda.
 The Vedic text in which the word 'Varna' is first mentioned is: Rigveda.
 The word 'Yava' mentioned in the Rigveda is used for: Barley.
 The famous 'Battle of Ten Kings' in the Rigveda was fought on the bank of the river:
Parushni (Ravi).
 The most mentioned river in early Vedic literature is: Indus.
 In the beginning of the Rigvedic period, what was considered an important valuable
property was: Cow.
 In the Vedic period, what was considered "Aghanya" (not to be killed) was: Cow.
 The Vedic literature in which salvation is discussed is: Upanishads.
 Among the Vedic deities, who was considered the priest was: Brihaspati.
 In the Later Vedic period, the axis of Aryan culture was considered to be: Kuru,
Panchala.
 In Vedic rituals, 'Hota' is related to: Rigveda.
 In Rigveda, 'Matetama', 'Devitama' and 'Naditama' are addressed to: The Saraswati
river.
 The Samhita of Shukla Yajurveda is: Vajasaneyi.
 The Rishi associated with the king Videha Madhava in the Shatapatha Brahmana was:
Rishi Gautama Rahugana.
 The text in which 'Purusha Medha' is mentioned is: Shatapatha Brahmana.
 'Gopatha Brahmana' is related to: Atharvaveda.
 'Ayurveda' i.e. 'Science of life' is first mentioned in: Atharvaveda.
 The Upanishad in which elements of 'pessimism' appear for the first time is:
Maitrayani.
 The 'Satyameva Jayate' on the Indian emblem is taken from: Mundakopanishad.
 Zend Avesta and Rigveda have similarities. Zend Avesta is related to: Iran.
 In ancient India, 'Nishka' were known as: Gold ornaments.
 An inscription from the 14th century BC describing Vedic deities has been found at:
Boghazkoi (Asia Minor).
 'Manusmriti' is mainly related to: Social order.
 The Upanishad with the dialogue between Nachiketa and Yama is: Kathopanishad.
 The mention in Rigveda indicating the Aryans' relationship with Afghanistan is: The
Kubha and Kramu rivers.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The most Rigvedic hymns are dedicated to: Indra.
 The literal meaning of the word 'Arya' is: Noble.
 Adhvaryu meant: The priest who performed the Yajna.
 King Ashwapati of the Upanishadic period was the ruler of: Kaikeya.
 Sarga, Pratisarga, Vamsa, Manvantara, and Vamsanucharita are indicators of:
Puranas.
 The first law-giver of India is considered to be: Manu.
 The word 'Koseya' is used for: Silk.
 In Classical Sanskrit, 'Arya' means: An excellent person.
 Rigveda is: A collection of hymns.
 The word "Itihasa" is mentioned in: Atharvaveda.
 The name of India was kept as 'Bharat' after the clan: Bharata.
 In the Iron Age, tools and weapons began to be made of iron instead of: Bronze.
 The collection of magical spells and charms is found in: Atharvaveda.
 The main social unit of the Aryans was: Jan.
 In the Later Vedic period, the Varna that mainly did farming, animal husbandry and
trade was: Vaishya.
 The ancient name of the Beas river is: Vipasha.
 The region where the Vedic Aryans lived was called: Sapta-Sindhu.
 The ancient name of the Jhelum river was: Vitasta.
 The river mentioned as 'Vitasta' in Vedic literature is: Jhelum.
 What is related to music is: Samaveda.
 The oldest Veda is: Rigveda.
 'Purusha Sukta' is a collection of hymns of: Rigveda.
 According to the 'Chaturashrama' system, the provision for the family period was made
for the stage of: Grihastha.
 Rishi Kapila was related to the sect of Indian philosophy: Samkhya.
 Rigveda is divided into books (mandalas): 10.
 The Upaveda related to the Rigveda is: Ayurveda.
 The two rivers in the Rigveda hymn with Rishi Vishwamitra are: Beas and Sutluj.
 A collection is: Atharvaveda.
 The Rigvedic name of the Ravi river is: Parushni.
 'Anushthana' denotes: Kalpa.
 The king in the Vedic civilization was called 'Gopati', which meant: The lord of
cattle.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Vedic civilization developed on the banks of the river: Saraswati.
 The propounder of Vaisheshika Darshana is: Kanada.

Political Condition of 6th Century B.C., Rise of Mahajanapadas and Magadha Empire
 In the sixth-fifth century BC, the people of Turkey called the language used by the
people east of the Indus: Hindvi
 The famous physician in the court of King Bimbisara who was the personal physician
of Lord Buddha was: Jivaka
 The number of Mahajanapadas mentioned in Jain and Buddhist texts in the sixth
century BC is: Sixteen
 The ancient capital of India was: Pataliputra
 The last ruler of the Magadha empire was: Dhanananda (The last ruler of the Nanda
dynasty)
 The capital of Magadha was shifted from Rajagriha to Pataliputra by: Udayin
 Bimbisara was the ruler of: Magadha
 The capital of the Magadha Empire was: Rajgir
 In the supreme period of Aryan culture, the Janapadas of the Ganga valley which
became Mahajanapadas in number were: 16
 In ancient times, 'Awadh' was known by the name of: Kosala
 The sixteen Mahajanapadas are mentioned in: Anguttara Nikaya
 Kalinga King Kharavela was related to: The Chedi dynasty
 The Matsya Mahajanapada of the 6th century B.C. was located in: Rajasthan
 The remains of the ancient city have been found at the Kumrahar site: Pataliputra
 The power of Magadha was expanded over the Malwa region during the time of:
Shishunaga
 The ruler of Magadha who killed his father for his enthronement and was himself
killed by his son for the same reason was: Ajatashatru
 The emperor of Magadha who is known by the name 'Aparoparshurama' is:
Mahapadmananda
 The city plan of ancient Avanti, the shape is: Semi-circular
 In the sixth century B.C. Shuktimati was the capital of: Chedi
 It appears from the inscribed evidence that a canal was dug on the order of the Nanda
king in: Kalinga
 The legend of Udayana-Vasavadatta is related to: Kaushambi

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The earliest capital of the Magadha empire in ancient India was: Rajgir
 The Magadha Mahajanapada was surrounded by the rivers: Ganga and Son
 The capital of Vajji Mahajanapada was: Vaishali
 The first capital of Magadha was: Rajagriha
 The first empire of ancient India, in which elephants were used on a large scale for
war, was: Magadha
 During the lifetime of Lord Gautama Buddha, great powers (Mahajanapadas) existed
in the seventh and sixth centuries B.C. which were: 16
 The ancient city of Champa is considered the capital of the Mahajanapada of: Anga
 The Mauryan dynasty ruled Magadha after the: Nanda dynasty
 Bimbisara was the king of the: Haryanka dynasty
 The famous physician Jivaka was appointed in the court of: Bimbisara
 The first ruler of Magadha from the Haryanka dynasty was: Bimbisara
 The last ruler of the Nanda dynasty was: Dhanananda
 King Ajatashatru was the ruler of the: Haryanka dynasty
 The ruler of the Haryanka dynasty who was the son of Ajatashatru was: Udayin
 In the fourth century BC, the capital of Magadha was shifted to: Pataliputra
 Bimbisara had sent the royal physician Jivaka for the treatment of the king of the:
Avanti dynasty
 The Magadha emperor who made Anga a part of his empire was: Bimbisara




Jainism
 The most important fundamental principle of Jainism is: Ahimsa
 Shvetambara and Digambara are sects of the religion: Jainism
 The 23rd Tirthankara of Jainism was: Parshvanatha
 The organization named Gaccha is related to: Jainism
 The 24th or the last Jain Tirthankara was: Mahavira
 The first Jain Tirthankara was: Rishabhadeva
 The Soniji Ki Nasian temple of Ajmer is dedicated to: Lord Rishabhadeva
 The water temple related to Jainism was built by: King Nandivardhan

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 In Jainism, a Tirthankara is called: The protector of religion and a spiritual teacher
 When a Tirthankara leaves his mortal body, it is known as: Nirvana
 The 'Agama' that describes non-violence in Jainism is: Sutrakritanga Sutra
 The first Tirthankara of Jainism is considered to be: Rishabhanatha
 Vardhamana Mahavira was the Tirthankara of Jainism: 24th
 The first Tirthankara out of the 24 Tirthankaras of Jainism is: Rishabhanatha
 Among the five vows of Jainism, the one that means non-attachment is: Aparigraha
 The holy person who gave Jainism its present form is: Mahavira
 Swami Mahavira was born at: Kundagrama
 The teachings of Mahavira are currently available at: Vallabhi in Gujarat
 The word 'Jain' is derived from the Sanskrit word 'Jina', which means: Victor
 The pilgrimage site of Jainism - Palitana temple is located in the state of: Gujarat
 The Digambara sect is related to: Jainism
 Lord Mahavira was born in the early sixth century BC at: Vaishali
 The original name of Lord Mahavira is: Vardhamana
 Jain monastic institutions are called: Basadis
 Mahavira is considered the last Tirthankara among the Tirthankaras: 24th
 Parshvanatha, the son of King Ashvasena of Banaras, became the Tirthankara of
Jainism: Twenty-third
 The word Shvetambara is associated with: Jainism
 The founder of Jainism was: Rishabhadeva
 The Jain Kalpasutra was composed by: Bhadrabahu
 The supreme goal of human life is 'Kaivalya', which means: To conquer desires
 A significant center of study during the Pala period in India was: Vikramshila
 The most important teachers of Vikramshila University were: Virochana, Atisha,
Dipankara and Ratnakar Shanti
 The excavation of Taxila University was carried out by: John Marshall
 Mahavira's first follower was: Jamali
 The principle of Triratna (Right Faith, Right Knowledge, Right Conduct) is the glory
of the religion: Jainism
 The founder of the "Ajivaka" sect was: Makkhali Gosala
 Early Jain literature was written in: The Ardha-Magadhi language
 Yapaniya was a sect of: Jainism
 The word Tirthankara is related to: Jainism

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Jain council in which the Shvetambara Agama was finally compiled was held at:
Pataliputra
 Prabhasgiri is a pilgrimage site for: Jains
 The religion that does not believe in the concept of 'world-destroying deluge' is:
Jainism
 The holy books of the Jains are called: Agama Siddhanta
 The philosophy which rejected the belief in reincarnation was: Charvaka
 The last Tirthankara of the Jains was: Vardhamana Mahavira
 Lord Mahavira attained Moksha at: Pawapuri
 The religion that had 24 Tirthankaras was: Jainism
 Vardhamana Mahavira was the son of the chief of the Kshatriya clan: Shatrika (or
Jnatrika)
 'Paryushana Parva' for self-purification is celebrated by: The Jain community
 Lord Mahavira was born in the present-day state of: Bihar
 The first Tirthankara of Jainism was: Rishabhadeva
 Santhara is a religious rite of the community: Jainism
 The holy city recognized as the birthplace of the first and fourth Jain Tirthankaras is:
Ayodhya
 According to Jain philosophy, the word 'Jina' means: Victor
 The teachings of Mahavira are currently present at: Vallabhi, Gujarat
 Correct Matchings:
o The birthplace of Sambhavanatha: Shravasti
o The birthplace of Suvidhinatha: Kakandi
o The birthplace of Rishabhanatha: Ayodhya
o The birthplace of Padmaprabhu: Pabhosa
Buddhism
 Gautama Buddha attained knowledge on the banks of the river: Niranjana
 'Tripitaka' is related to: Buddhism
 Who was a follower of Buddhism: Ashoka
 Propagated Buddhism abroad: Ashoka
 'Jataka tales' are related to: Gautama Buddha
 The third Buddhist council was held in: Pataliputra
 The place ruled by the Shakya dynasty rulers was: Kapilavastu

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Gautama Buddha gave his first sermon at Sarnath in the: Dhamma-Chakra-
Pravartana Mudra
 The place where the first Buddhist council was held was: Rajgir
 It has been decided to install a 200-foot-tall bronze statue of Lord Buddha in:
Kushinagar
 Buddha attained Mahaparinirvana in: Kushinagar
 The monument from which Gautama Buddha propagated his divine knowledge of
Buddhism to the world was: Mahabodhi Temple Complex
 The place where, according to the belief of Buddhists, Gautama Buddha attained
Parinirvana after his death is: Kushinagar
 The one which is not a Tipitaka is: Upasaka Pitaka
 After attaining knowledge, Gautama came to be known as: Buddha
 Bodh Gaya is an important Buddhist pilgrimage center because Gautama Buddha had
attained knowledge here. After attaining knowledge, Lord Buddha gave his first
sermon in Sarnath.
 Buddha gave his first sermon in: Sarnath
 Sarnath, located in Uttar Pradesh, is important for Buddhists because: After attaining
knowledge, Lord Buddha gave his first sermon here
 A Buddhist philosopher was: Nagarjuna
 Buddha gave his first sermon to his five disciples at Sarnath, which is called:
Dharmachakrapravartana
 In Vaishali, the second Buddhist council was conducted by: Kalasoka
 Therigatha, a Buddhist text, is a part of which collection of verses composed by nuns:
Sutta Pitaka
 The one among the three Pitakas related to philosophical matters is: Abhidhamma
Pitaka
 It is believed that Gautama (Siddhartha) meditated with a pure heart for six years at a
place before going to Bodh Gaya for final enlightenment: Pragbodhi
 Gautama Buddha belonged to the Gana of: Shakya
 Gautama Buddha attained knowledge in the city of: Bodh Gaya
 A sacred text related to Buddhism is: Tripitaka
 Gautama Buddha attained enlightenment in: Bodh Gaya
 Hinayana and Mahayana are sects of which religion: Buddhism
 The Simhachaturmukha pillar is located at: Sarnath
 The concept of Bodhisattva is related to: Mahayana Buddhism

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Vinaya and Sutta Pitakas are compilations of the teachings of: Gautama Buddha
 Among the teachings of Gautama Buddha, what is known as the fire sermon is:
Adittapariyaya Sutta
 Jataka tales are related to: Buddhism
 The epic poem named 'Buddhacharita' was written by: Ashvaghosha
 Where was Gautama Buddha born: Lumbini
 The Buddhist text that mentions the rules for monks is: Vinaya Pitaka
 Stupas were built to: Hold sacred relics
 Queen Mayadevi gave birth to Gautama Buddha under a: Sal tree
 The foundation of Buddhism is based on the great truths and the eightfold path: Four,
eight
 Tripitaka is the earliest collection of the teachings of: Buddhism
 The Tripitaka holy scripture is related to: Buddhism
 Where did Gautama Buddha attain knowledge: Bodh Gaya
 Bodh Gaya is located in the Indian state of: Bihar
 Gautama Buddha used the language of the common people in his sermons: Pali
 In Jataka tales, the birth and previous lives of are described: The Buddha
 Religious unrest was seen in India in the century B.C. with the rise of Jainism and
Buddhism: Sixth
 The name of Gautama Buddha's mother was: Maya Devi
 The architecture mainly consists of Chaityas, Viharas, Stupas and Pillars: Buddhist
 The Buddhist pilgrimage site 'Temple of the Tooth' is located here: Sri Lanka
 Borobudur Buddhist temple is located in: Indonesia
 The paintings of the Ajanta caves are proof of the golden age of in India: Buddhism
 The paintings of the Ajanta caves depict: Jataka tales
 Buddha was born in: Lumbini
 The place where Buddha died is: In Uttar Pradesh
 The event of Buddha's life which is known as 'Mahabhinishkramana' is: The Great
Renunciation
 The teachings of Buddha are related to: Purity and sanctity of conduct
 The event of Buddha's life which is depicted by 'the wheel with a deer' in Indian art is:
The first sermon
 Buddha gave the most sermons in: Shravasti
 The entry of women as nuns in the Buddhist Sangha was permitted by Buddha in:
Vaishali

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 During Buddha's lifetime, who wanted to become the head of the Sangha was:
Devadatta
 The last person to be converted by Buddha was: Subhadda
 'Tripitaka' is: A collection of Buddha's teachings
 In Buddhism, "Triratna" indicates: Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha
 The first Buddhist council was held during the reign of: Ajatashatru
 'The world is unstable and transient' this statement was of: The Buddhists
 The Buddhist text in which the rules of Sangha life are found is: Vinaya Pitaka
 The foreign king who requested Samudragupta to be allowed to build a Buddhist
monastery in India was: Meghavarna
 The two banjaras Mahatma Buddha made his followers by preaching to them were:
Mallika and Tapassu
 The 'Saptaparni cave' is located at: Rajgriha (Bihar)
 The book named 'Vimuttimagga' is related to the sect: Hinayana
 The Buddhist philosopher who first propounded the theory of Shunyata was:
Nagarjuna
 In Uttar Pradesh, the famous pilgrimage site for both Buddhists and Jains is:
Kaushambi
 Both Buddhism and Jainism believe that: The principles of karma and rebirth are
correct
 Bāmiyān in Afghanistan was famous for: Its Buddha statues
 The foundation of idol worship in the country was laid by: Buddhism
 The period in which a standing statue of Buddha was made was: Kushana period
 The Sarnath Buddha statue in Bhumi Sparsha Mudra is related to: Gupta period
 The founder of 'Vikramshila Vihara' was: Dharmapala
 The relics of Sariputta were found in the excavation of the stupa at: Sanchi
 The Buddhist holy site that is located on the Niranjana river is: Bodh Gaya
 Who is known as 'the Light of Asia': Gautama Buddha
 Jivaka, the famous physician of Gautama Buddha's time, was related to the court of:
Bimbisara
 Buddha came to Kaushambi during: The reign of Udayana
 The Upadhyaya Atisha, who played a major role in the propagation of Buddhism in
Tibet, was a famous scholar of the monastery: Vikramshila Vihara
 The half Shiva and half Parvati in the Ardhanarishvara idol is a symbol of: The union
of a deity and his power

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Gautama Buddha gave his first religious sermon in: Sarnath
 The first human statues to be worshipped in India were of: The Buddha
 The event of Buddha's life which is depicted by "the wheel with a deer" in Indian art
is: The first sermon
 The first woman to become a Buddhist nun was: Mahapajapati Gotami
 The oldest stupa of the Buddhist period is: Sanchi Stupa
 Buddha meditated for several days under a peepal tree in: Bodh Gaya
 The rules for Buddhist monks living in the "Sangha" are found in the text named:
Vinaya Pitaka
 Before his Mahaparinirvana, Buddha gave his last sermon in: Vaishali
 The first Buddhist council was held immediately after the death of Gautama Buddha.
 The first Buddhist council was patronized by: Ajatashatru
 The third Buddhist council was held in the city of: Pataliputra
 Most of the texts of Buddhism were written in the language: Pali
 Buddhism was divided into Mahayana and Hinayana during the reign of: Kanishka
 The word 'stupa' is related to the event of Gautama Buddha's life: Death
 'Tripitaka' is related to the religion: Buddhism
 The sermons of Gautama Buddha are mainly found in: The Sutta Pitaka
 During the reign of Kanishka, which was chosen for the site of the Fourth Buddhist
Council was: Kashmir
 At which Buddhist site in India did Gautama Buddha first preach his religion: Sarnath
 Kye Gompa, the largest center of Buddhist education in the Western Himalayas, is
located in: Himachal Pradesh




Mauryan Dynasty
 The Mauryan dynasty was founded in Magadha, which is currently known as: By the
name of Bihar
 The last ruler of the Mauryan dynasty was: Brihadratha
 The person whose name was also 'Devanampiya Piyadassi' was: Mauryan Emperor
Ashoka

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The son of Chandragupta who ruled between 298-272 BCE and expanded the empire
throughout India was: Bindusara
 The person who defeated Chandragupta Maurya was: Dhanananda, the last ruler of
the Nanda dynasty
 The most famous king for establishing a detailed system of municipal administration
was: Chandragupta Maurya
 The author of 'Indica' which contains a description of Mauryan-era India was:
Megasthenes
 The Mauryan economy was primarily dependent on: Agricultural economy
 The largest among Ashoka's Major Rock Edicts is: The 13th
 During Ashoka's invasion, the capital of Kalinga (the eastern province) was: Toshali
 The rock edict of Emperor Ashoka that mentions his victory over Kalinga is: The
Thirteenth
 The city of Taxila was located between the rivers: Indus and Jhelum
 The lion capital of Ashoka was on a pillar at: Sarnath
 The famous political advisor of Chandragupta Maurya was known by the name:
Chanakya (Vishnugupta)
 The rock edict of Ashoka in which the Brahmi script was not used was: Shahbazgarhi
 The best example of Mauryan art is: Pillars
 Was not under Ashoka's empire: Kamarupa
 The Great Sanchi Stupa is related to the: Mauryan period
 The capital of Magadha for many years before it was shifted to Pataliputra was:
Rajagriha
 The Lauriya Nandangarh pillar is located in: Champaran
 The Mauryan emperor who had his writings engraved on rocks and pillars was:
Ashoka
 The paternal grandfather of Emperor Ashoka was: Chandragupta Maurya
 The site where Ashoka's edicts are located is situated in modern-day Gujarat is:
Girnar
 The Mauryan emperor who led a military campaign to conquer Kalinga in
approximately 260 BCE was: Ashoka
 Most of Ashoka's inscriptions were in the language: Prakrit
 During the Mauryan rule, the province which was considered the center of gold mines
in Karnataka was: Suvarnagiri
 The Buddhist structure, 'Dhammekh Stupa' is located at: Sarnath

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The ambassador named Megasthenes was sent to the court of Chandragupta Maurya by
the Greek ruler Seleucus Nicator.
 The Sarnath lion capital built by the Mauryan ruler Ashoka was made of: Sandstone
 To invade India in 326 BCE, Alexander first crossed the river: Indus
 The Buddhist monument built by Emperor Ashoka in honor of Lord Buddha in
Madhya Pradesh is: Sanchi Stupa
 The Sanchi Stupa was built by: Ashoka
 The famous building structure related to Buddhism, the Dhammekh Stupa, was
originally built during the reign of the Mauryan dynasty in: Sarnath
 The third Buddhist council was organized by: Ashoka
 Ashoka, who conquered Kalinga, was the grandson of: Chandragupta Maurya
 During the reign of the Mauryan dynasty, the historic Grand Trunk Road was called:
Uttarapatha
 Seeing the violence of the Kalinga War, Emperor Ashoka had a change of heart and
became a follower of: Buddhism
 The guru of Chandragupta Maurya was: Vishnu Gupta
 Udayin had shifted the capital of Magadha from the city of: Rajgir
 The book written by Megasthenes is: Indica
 The earliest known inscriptions of Ashoka are written in the script: Brahmi
 Who mentioned the Adhyakshas as the superintendents of various departments in the
Mauryan administration was: Kautilya
 The special officers appointed by Emperor Ashoka in the 12th year of his reign were
called: Rajjuka
 The story of the king which is the subject of the play Mudrarakshasa is:
Chandragupta Maurya
 The architect who built the palace of King Bimbisara was: Mahagovinda
 Which is considered more authentic for the history of the Mauryas is: The Vishnu
Purana
 Which is considered more authentic for the history of the Andhras is: The Matsya
Purana
 The ruler who is not related to the Mauryan dynasty is: Agnimitra
 The stone for Ashoka's pillar inscriptions was extracted from: Chunar
 The rock edict of Ashoka that talks about religious synthesis (coordination) is: The
Twelfth rock edict
 Emperor Ashoka conquered Kalinga after his coronation in the year: After eight years

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The rulers who paid attention to the water resource system in the Girnar region were:
Chandragupta Maurya, Ashoka
 The king from whose inscription information is received that Shakyamuni Buddha was
born in Lumbini was: Ashoka
 The Sarnath pillar was built by: Ashoka
 The most secure pillar established by Ashoka is: Lauriya-Nandangarh
 The inscription of Ashoka which authenticates the existence of Kanakamuni Buddha
is: The Nigali Sagar pillar inscription
 The Gurjara Minor Rock Edict, which mentions the name of Ashoka, is located in:
Datia district of Madhya Pradesh
 Among Ashoka's inscriptions, the one completely dedicated to religious tolerance is:
Rock Edict XII
 Brahmi script was first deciphered by: James Prinsep
 Pre-Ashokan Brahmi script has been found in: Anuradhapura
 The oldest inscriptions on stone were in: Prakrit language
 For the royal edicts inscribed in the north-western part of his empire, Ashoka used the
scripts: Aramaic, Greek and Kharoshthi
 The Ashoka pillar in Allahabad provides information about: Samudragupta
 Fa Hien came to India in: 399 A.D.
 Ashoka's contemporary king Turmaya was: The ruler of Egypt
 Ashoka's contemporary king in Macedonia was: Antigonus Gonatas
 Ptolemy Philadelphus, with whom Ashoka had diplomatic relations, was the ruler of:
Egypt
 According to a historian, the religion that Ashoka propounded in the inscriptions was
actually a state religion was: Fleet
 The ancient form of the modern Devanagari script is: Brahmi
 Who established the state religion on the three-fold basis of tolerance, generosity, and
compassion was: Ashoka
 The stupa of Sanchi was built by: Ashoka
 The first deciphering of the Brahmi script was done from engraved letters on: Pillars
 Bulandibagh was an ancient site of: Pataliputra
 In the Mauryan period, the doors of the famous education center of Taxila were open
for: Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas
 The penal code in the Mauryan period was: Very strict
 Kalsi is famous for: Ashoka's inscription

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Chandragupta Maurya spent his last days at: Shravanabelagola
 The inscription of Ashoka which talks about the principle of religious tolerance is:
Rock Edict XII
 After the death of Chandragupta Maurya, who sat on the throne of the Mauryan
Empire was: Bindusara
 Who was responsible for the assassination of the last Mauryan emperor was:
Pushyamitra Shunga
 The responsibility of the administrative functions of the Mauryan army was entrusted
to a board of: 30 members
 Who classified Indian society into seven classes was: Megasthenes
 According to Ashoka's inscriptions, a provincial center in the Magadha Empire was
not: Indraprastha
 The text that gives a subtle description of the administrative and military organization
of the Mauryan empire period is: Arthashastra
 In Kautilya's Saptanga theory, "Amatya" refers to: Ministers and officials
 Emperor Ashoka conquered Kalinga after: 8 years of his coronation
 The Mauryan ruler who gave up fighting after the Battle of Kalinga was: Ashoka
 Mauryan Emperor Chandragupta Maurya defeated: Seleucus Nicator
 Who defeated the last Nanda ruler Dhanananda with the help of Kautilya in 322 BCE:
Chandragupta Maurya
 The function of an officer named Samaharta was: Tax assessment
 The founder of the Mauryan Empire was: Chandragupta Maurya
 Who first deciphered the Brahmi script in 1837: James Prinsep
 The script that is considered the mother of all modern Indian scripts is: Brahmi
 The last ruler of the Mauryan dynasty was: Brihadratha
 Emperor Ashoka adopted Buddhism: After the Kalinga War
 Who was not related to the Mauryan dynasty was: Bimbisara
 Ashoka had his messages inscribed on stone surfaces for his subjects and officials.
 The Kandahar inscriptions of Ashoka were discovered in: 1958
 In the context of ancient Indian history, the Ashoka pillar is related to: Sanchi
 With the help of Kautilya, Chandragupta Maurya overthrew the empire of the Nandas
in Magadha.
 In the Seleucid-Mauryan war, Seleucus fought a war against the Mauryan ruler:
Chandragupta Maurya

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The lake in Gujarat is an artificial reservoir which was built during the reign of the
Mauryas: Sudarshana
 Ashoka, who conquered coastal Odisha, is known as: Kalinga
 'Devanam Priya' is the name by which is known: Ashoka

Post-Mauryan Period India
 The court physician during the reign of King Kanishka was: Charaka
 The founder of 'Yoga-Darshana' was: Maharishi Patanjali
 The famous Ayurveda scholar who lived during the reign of Kanishka I was: Charaka
 The Kushanas were originally inhabitants of: Chinese Turkestan
 Vikram Samvat started in: 57 BCE
 The astronomer Varahamihira and the poet Kalidasa were part of the court of:
Vikramaditya
 The Indian dynasty that issued coins with the pictures of its rulers was the:
Satavahana dynasty
 Kushana was related to the dynasty.
 The Shaka era began in: 78 AD
 The most famous among the Kushana kings was: Kanishka
 In the beginning of the first century BCE, the Kushanas ruled the north-western border
of India.



Post-Mauryan Period in India
 The court physician during the reign of King Kanishka was: Charaka
 The founder of 'Yoga-Darshana' was: Maharishi Patanjali
 The famous Ayurveda scholar who lived during the reign of Kanishka I was: Charaka
 The Kushanas were originally inhabitants of: Chinese Turkestan
 Vikram Samvat started in: 57 BCE
 The astronomer Varahamihira and the poet Kalidasa were part of the court of:
Vikramaditya

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Indian dynasty that issued coins with the pictures of its rulers was the:
Satavahana dynasty
 Kushana was related to the dynasty.
 The Shaka era began in: 78 AD
 The most famous among the Kushana kings was: Kanishka
 In the beginning of the first century BCE, the Kushanas established their rule over the
north-western border of India.
 The Hathigumpha inscription from Udayagiri in Odisha was written by the king of
Kalinga: Kharavela
 The hero of Kalidasa's Malavikagnimitram, Agnimitra, was the son of: Pushyamitra
 Simuka was the founder of the dynasty: Of the Satavahana
 The Kardamaka Kshatrapas issued extremely rare coins in the metal: Copper metal
 What is not mentioned in Ashoka's second rock edict is: The Satavahanas
 The source of information about Kharavela is: The Hathigumpha inscription
 Among the dynasties, the oldest dynasty was: Satavahana
 After the Mauryas, the most influential state in South India was: Satavahana
 The capital of the Satavahanas was located at: Amaravati
 The date of Kanishka's Sarnath Buddhist statue inscription is: 81 CE
 Buddha's depiction on coins occurred during the reign of: Kanishka
 The largest number of copper coins were issued in Northern and North-Western India
by: The Kushanas
 The earliest specimen of Kavya style is found in the inscription of: Rudradaman of
Kathiawar
 In ancient India, who regularly issued gold coins: The Kushanas
 Who renovated the Sudarshana lake without forced labor: Rudradaman I
 In the literary history of ancient India, Panini and Patanjali are famous names from:
The time of the Shunga dynasty
 Vikram Samvat started in: 58 BCE
 The author of Mahabhashya, 'Patanjali', was a contemporary of: Pushyamitra Shunga
 The difference (in years) between Vikram and Shaka Samvat is: 135 years
 Pushyamitra, who assassinated the last Mauryan emperor Brihadratha and established a
new dynasty, his dynasty was: Shunga
 The Kushana ruler who is famous in history as a great patron of Buddhism and who
also organized the Fourth Buddhist Council was: Kanishka
 The Ningthouja dynasty ruled over the state of India: Manipur

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The founder of the Shunga dynasty was: Pushyamitra
 The Hathigumpha (Elephant Cave) inscription in the Udayagiri hills of Odisha was
inscribed by: Kharavela
 Vikram Samvat started in: 57 BCE
 'Eka Brahmana' has been used for: Gautamiputra Satakarni
 Correct Matchings:
o Demetrius: Indo-Greek
o Rudradaman: Shaka
o Gondophernes: Parthian
o Vima: Kushana

Foreign Invasions of Ancient India
 The 'Garuda Pillar' was built at Besnagar near Vidisha in Madhya Pradesh by:
Heliodorus
 The ones who addressed our country as 'India' were: Greeks
 The Indo-Greek ruler who issued lead coins was: Strato II
 The ruler who is credited with first issuing gold coins is: Vima Kadphises
 The name of the brave Indian king, who was defeated by Alexander on the banks of
the Jhelum was: Puru (Porus)
 After a large number of soldiers were killed in the battlefield, the women of the 'Indian
Republic or State' took up arms against Alexander: Massaga
 The foreign invader who handed over his territories to Chandragupta Maurya was:
Seleucus Nicator
 The Shaka ruler in India from 130-150 AD was: Rudradaman I
 Alexander defeated who in the Battle of Hydaspes: Porus
 The first Huna invasion took place in: 458 AD
 The 'Garuda Pillar' was built at Besnagar near Vidisha in Madhya Pradesh by:
Heliodorus


Sangam Period (Chera, Chola, Pandya)

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The likely language spoken in the Chera kingdom of Mahodayapuram was:
Malayalam
 The construction of a sixteen-mile-long 'Chola lake' for irrigation was done by:
Rajendra I
 According to Chola inscriptions, the land given to Jain assemblies as a donation was
called: Pallichchhandam
 Sangam literature was composed in the language: Tamil
 The land given for the maintenance of a Gurukul mentioned in a Chola inscription was
called: Shalabhoga
 The dynasty that established shipping enterprises in Southeast Asia was the: Chola
 The capital of the Pandya dynasty was: Madurai
 The dynasty that ruled the area around Madurai and attained supremacy in the
thirteenth century was: The Pandyas
 Among the early Chola kings, the one considered the greatest is: Karikala
 The Chalukya king who defeated King Harsha of Kannauj was: Pulakeshin II
 The early Chera kings ruled the states of: Tamil Nadu and Kerala
 The Sangam text Tolkappiyam is based on: Grammar
 The Tamil text which has been called 'Laghuveda' is: Kural
 The author of Silappadikaram was: Ilango
 The third Sangam was held at: Madurai
 The archaeological site named Goddiproly is located in the state of: Andhra Pradesh

Chola Empire
 The Shiva temple that was not built under the patronage of the Chola rulers was:
Gondeshwar Temple, Sinnar
 The famous bronze statue of 'Nataraja' is an excellent example of: Chola art
 The dynasty that used to declare its successor during its own reign was: Chola
 The South Indian state that was famous for its naval power was: Chola
 The credit for building a huge artificial lake named Chola Gangam is given to:
Rajendra
 The Brihadishvara Temple of Thanjavur was built by: Rajaraja I
 The Chola kingdom was spread in the area of: Coromandel Coast, parts of the
Deccan

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 During the reign of the Chola rulers, the Variyam that looked after the garden
administration was: Totta Variyam
 The Chola ruler, Rajaraja I, conquered the northern part of Sri Lanka.
 The Chola king who gave complete independence to Sri Lanka and married his
daughter to the Sinhala prince was: Kulottunga I
 72 traders were sent to China during the reign of: Kulottunga-I
 The famous 'Battle of Takkolam' of South India took place between: The Cholas and
the Rashtrakutas
 The last ruler of the Chola dynasty was: Rajendra Chola III
 The Chola king who won a naval victory over the islands of Maldives was: Rajaraja
 The Brihadishvara Temple which was dedicated to Lord Shiva in the year 1014, is
located in: Thanjavur
 The ruler of the Chola dynasty who held the title of 'Shivapada Shekhara' was:
Rajaraja-I
 The Chola king Rajaraja I ascended the throne in: 985 AD
 In Chola administration, the assembly of villages which was mainly settled by
Brahmins was: Sabha
 Sabha and Ur, two types of village assemblies, are mentioned in the dynasty: Chola

Chalukya Dynasty
 The capital of the Chalukyas was: Vatapi
 Who used to manage the bathrooms and kitchens of the Chalukya kings: Both women
and men
 The Chinese traveler who gave an account of the relations between China and India
during the reign of the Chalukyas was: Xuanzang
 By which dynasty were women often given high positions in the administration:
Chalukya
 The Sanskrit poet and playwright Kalidasa is mentioned in: The Aihole inscription of
Pulakeshin II
 In the date inscription of a Chalukya inscription, the year of Shaka Samvat is given as
556. Its equivalent year is: 634 AD
 The rulers named Pulakeshin I and Pulakeshin II were related to: Chalukya dynasty
 Pulakeshin II was the most famous ruler of the dynasty: Chalukya

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The capital of Aihole was: The Chalukyas

Pallava Dynasty
 The author of 'Mattavilasa Prahasana' was: Mahendravarman
 The Pallava king whose title was 'Rajasimha' was: Narasimhavarman II
 King Simha Vishnu was the ruler of the dynasty: Pallava
 Who became very powerful in the seventh and eighth centuries and Kanchipuram was
their capital: The Pallavas
 The king of the Pallava dynasty who also wrote Sanskrit plays was:
Mahendravarman

Other
 The Brihadishvara Temple of Thanjavur was built during the reign of: Rajaraja
 The capital of the Hoysala Empire was: Dwarasamudra
 Who were initially subordinates of the Chalukyas of Karnataka: The Rashtrakutas
 In the middle of the eighth century, a Rashtrakuta chief, Dantidurga, overthrew his
Chalukya overlord and performed a ritual which was literally called: Hiranya Garbha
 The city that is the capital of the Pandya kings is: Madurai
 Who used to decorate the assembly of the Pallavas: The famous Sanskrit writer
Dandin
 In the third century, Warangal was famous for: Iron tools/equipment
 The ruler of the Chola dynasty who adopted the title of 'Shivapada Shekhara' was:
Rajaraja-I
 Who were initially subordinates of the Chalukyas of Karnataka: The Rashtrakutas
 The Chola king Rajaraja I ascended the throne in: 985 AD
 In the middle of the eighth century, a Rashtrakuta chief, Dantidurga, overthrew his
Chalukya overlord and performed a ritual which was literally called: Hiranya Garbha
 In Chola administration, the assembly of villages which was mainly settled by
Brahmins was: Sabha
 The city that is the capital of the Pandya kings is: Madurai
 Sabha and Ur, two types of village assemblies, are mentioned in the dynasty: Chola

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The capital of Aihole was: The Chalukyas
 Ravikirti was the court poet of the Chalukya ruler: Pulakeshin II
 The ruler of the dynasty who invaded Malaya to free his trade with China was: Chola
 The Chola Empire (dynasty) was founded by: Vijayalaya
 Vikramaditya VI, whose court poet Bilhana wrote his biography, was the ruler of the
dynasty: Chalukya
 The Chalukya dynasty ruled in Vatapi, which is in the modern Indian state of:
Karnataka
 In the twelfth century, a new movement emerged in Karnataka which was led by
Basavanna, who was a Brahmin and a minister in the court of King: The Chalukya
king
 Queen Rudrama Devi was a famous ruler of the dynasty: The Kakatiya dynasty
 Badami was the oldest capital of the dynasty: Chalukya dynasty
 The first king of the Chola dynasty who conquered Sri Lanka was: Rajendra I
 Kolathunadu, Valluvanadu and Vekkumkur were short-lived ancient kingdoms in the
state of India: Kerala
 Correct Matchings:
o Ruler Rajaraja's reign: 985-1015 AD
o Ruler Rajadhiraja I's reign: 1044-1052 AD
o Ruler Kulottunga I's reign: 1070-1120 AD
o Ruler Vikram Chola's reign: 1120-1133 AD
 Correct Matchings:
o Pallava dynasty's capital: Kanchi
o Kadamba dynasty's capital: Vanavasi
o Pandya dynasty's capital: Madura
o Kakatiya dynasty's capital: Warangal
 Correct Matchings:
o Pallava dynasty's capital: Kanchi
o Pandya dynasty's capital: Madura
o Yadava dynasty's capital: Devagiri
o Kakatiya dynasty's capital: Warangal

Gupta Period

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The ruler in whose court many scholars were adorned as 'Navaratnas' was:
Chandragupta II
 'Indian Napoleon' is considered to be: Samudragupta
 The first silver coins were issued by: Chandragupta II 'Vikramaditya'
 The best example of Buddhist paintings from the Gupta period is found in: Ajanta
paintings
 Who visited India during the reign of the second Chandragupta: Fa Hien
 The ruler whose court poet was Harishena was: Samudragupta
 In Indian history, Dhanvantari was: A famous physician who adorned the court of
Chandragupta Vikramaditya
 The famous female ruler of the Gupta period was: Prabhavati Gupta
 The Prayag Prashasti provides us with information about the achievements of:
Samudragupta
 Who made a significant contribution in the field of algebra in India: Aryabhata
 Who is one of the nine gems (Navaratnas) of Chandragupta II: Varahamihira
 'The Napoleon of India' is known as: Samudragupta
 The name of the daughter of Chandragupta II was: Prabhavati Gupta
 Vikramaditya, is another name for the famous Gupta ruler: Chandragupta II
 The famous poem 'Meghaduta' is the work of: Kalidasa
 In Prashasti, the rulers of the wrote their achievements: Gupta Empire
 One of the kings of the Gupta Empire was also a good Veena player: Samudragupta
 The age that is called the golden age of ancient India is: Gupta
 Nalanda University was founded by the Indian ruler: Kumargupta I
 Who took over the reins of the Gupta Empire after Chandragupta I: Samudragupta
 In the beginning of the fourth century, the Guptas established a small empire in:
Magadha
 The city that was the capital of the Gupta dynasty was: Pataliputra
 The real founder of the Gupta Empire was: Sri Gupta
 During the Gupta period, the traveler from China who visited India was: Fa Hien
 Chandragupta II had expanded the Gupta empire up to Gujarat in the year: 390 AD
 The Bhitari pillar inscriptions belong to the time of the reign of the Gupta Empire,
which is related to: Skandagupta
 The Mandsaur-Prashasti presents a description of the achievements of: Kumargupta-I
 In the context of the Shaka victory, the strongest evidence is the silver coins of the
king: Chandragupta-II

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The first Gupta ruler to issue silver coins was: Chandragupta II
 'Shak-vijeta' is known as: Chandragupta II
 The Gupta ruler who won a victory over the Hunas was: Skandagupta

Gupta Period: Economy and Trade
 'Bhaga' and 'Bali' were: Sources of revenue
 The Gupta gold coin was called: Dinara
 In the Gupta inscriptions, 'Dinara' is a synonym for: Gold coin
 The Mandsaur inscription of 437-38 AD mentions the construction of a magnificent
Sun temple by: A guild of silk weavers
 The main Gupta ruler who issued silver coins was: Chandragupta II
 In the Gupta period, North Indian trade was conducted through: Tamlalipti port
 The Gupta rulers imposed a fine named, which was a plough-tax to be paid by every
farmer who owned a plough: Halivakar

Gupta Period: Society and Administration
गुप्त काल: माज और प्रशा न
 The Kayastha caste was first mentioned by: Yajnavalkya
 The ritual for the liberation of slaves was first prescribed by: Narada
 The first epigraphic reference to 'Sati practice' is found at: Eran
 In the context of administration under the Gupta rulers, the term 'Bhukti' meant: A
province
 In the context of Gupta administration, the word 'Vidhi' refers to a: Administrative
unit

Gupta Period: Religion and Philosophy
 The Buddha statue in Bhumisparsha Mudra at Sarnath belongs to the period of: Gupta
 The initial branch of Indian philosophy is: Samkhya
 The theory of Karma is related to: Mimamsa

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The propounder of Yoga philosophy is: Patanjali
 Nyaya philosophy was propagated by: Gautama
 The distinguishing feature between Theistic and Atheistic sects in India is: Belief in
the authority of the Vedas
 In Kamarupa, Vaishnavism was made popular by: Shankardeva

Other Facts (Post-Gupta Period)
 In ancient India, the dynasty whose reign is called the 'Golden Age' is: Gupta
 The dynasty that was greatly disturbed by the invasion of the Hunas was: Gupta
 Who is especially known for his contribution in the field of algebra is: Bhaskara
 The hero of the work 'Malavikagnimitram' composed by Kalidasa was: Agnimitra
 Pundravardhana Bhukti was located in: North Bengal
 Whose inscription is found on the pillar containing Samudragupta's Prayag Prashasti:
Jahangir's
 Nalanda University was founded in the 5th century by: Kumargupta
 The Vakataka dynasty was directly related to: Chandragupta II
 The queen of the Vakataka empire, Prabhavati Gupta, was the daughter of Kubernaga
and: Chandragupta II
 An important port city of ancient India was: Tamralipta
 Who married a girl from the Lichchhavi dynasty: Chandragupta
 Between 319 AD and 550 AD, who ruled India: The Gupta dynasty
 The Chinese traveler 'Sung Yun' came to India in: 518 AD
 The Chinese pilgrim who came to India at the beginning of the sixth century was:
Sung Yun

Harshavardhana and the Pushyabhuti Dynasty
 During Harshavardhana's reign, the new capital was which was shifted from Thanesar:
Kannauj
 The capital of Harshavardhana was: Kannauj
 Harshavardhana took 5 Indies under his control. These 5 Indies were: Punjab,
Kannauj, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The place where Harshavardhana organized the Buddhist Maha-Sammelan was:
Prayag
 Before Kannauj, Harshavardhana was the ruler of: Thanesar
 Harshavardhana was related to: Pushyabhuti dynasty
 Who came to India during the reign of Harshavardhana: Xuanzang
 The court poet of King Harshavardhana was: Banabhatta
 The Chinese traveler Xuanzang came to India during the reign of: Harshavardhana
 The Chinese Buddhist monk, who studied Buddhist scriptures at Nalanda and is
famous for his 17-year long journey to India from 627 to 643 AD, was: Xuanzang
(Hiuen Tsang)
 Banabhatta was the court poet of: King Harshavardhana
 Emperor Harshavardhana organized two great religious conferences in: Kannauj and
Prayag
 King Shashanka, against whom Harshavardhana declared war, was the ruler of the
empire: Gauda
 Harshavardhana established his dominance on the thrones of Thanesar and Kannauj
after the death of his brother: Rajyavardhan
 The year of the victory of the Chalukya ruler Pulakeshin over Harshavardhana was:
618 AD

Other Dynasties and Personalities
 The first king of the Pala dynasty was: Gopala
 Ravikirti's Aihole inscription describes in detail the victory of Pulakeshin II over:
Harsha
 The kings who were directly elected by the people were: Gopala, Nandivarman
Pallavamalla
 After the death of Harshavardhana, the kings of the Pratihara, Pala and Rashtrakuta
dynasties fought with each other to gain supremacy over: Kannauj
 After the death of Harsha, around the seventh century, who came into prominence and
their period was considered as the dark age of India: Rajputs
 The famous Vikramshila University, established in the 9th century, was founded by:
Dharmapala
 Which Mauryan ruler was mentioned by Banabhatta in Harshacharita: Brihadratha

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The city of Harsud in Madhya Pradesh was built by: Harshavardhana

Travelers and Trade
 The Chinese traveler who came to Nalanda and stayed as both a student and a teacher
was: Xuanzang
 The Chinese traveler I-tsing stayed for three years in... and learned Sanskrit:
Tamralipti
 During the reign of Harshavardhana, the Chinese traveler who visited India was:
Xuanzang
 The Chinese pilgrim who came to India in search of Buddhist scriptures was:
Xuanzang
 Correct Matchings:
o Fa Hien: 399 to 414 AD
o Xuanzang: 629 to 645 AD
o I-tsing: 671-72 to 693-94 AD
o Al-Masudi: 915 to 916 AD
 The most famous pastoral and hunting tribes 'Mongols' were settled in: Central Asia
 The founder of the Vindhyashakti dynasty was: Vakataka
 The stupa which has the characteristics of 'Aryak-Stambha' is: Amravati
 The stupa which has the characteristics of a platform with 'Aryak-Stambha' is:
Amravati and Nagarjunikonda
 The ruler who performed four Ashvamedha Yajnas was: Pravarasena I
 Vallabhi University was located in: Gujarat
 Where was a Mauryan dynasty ruling in the sixth-seventh centuries: Lat
 The capital of the Kadambas, Banavasi, was located in: Goa
 The name of the coins referred to in the Pratihara inscriptions was: Dramma
 The first Indian astronomer to calculate the time taken for the Earth to revolve around
the Sun was: Bhaskaracharya

Temple Architecture

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 A new style of temple architecture was created by a selective blend of the architectural
traditions of 'North Indian temple style' and 'South Indian temple style': Vesara style
 Dilwara Jain temple is: On the Aravalli mountain at Mount Abu
 The well-known Sun temple is built at: Konark
 The Kandaraya Mahadeva temple dedicated to Lord Shiva was built by the Chandela
dynasty ruler Angadeva in approximately 999 CE: Chandela dynasty
 The credit for the establishment of the famous Konark Sun temple is given to: King
Narasimhadeva I
 The temple called Black Pagoda by European sailors was: Konark Temple
 The famous Konark Sun Temple is located in: Odisha
 The famous monuments of the Khajuraho group are in the state of: Madhya Pradesh
 The magnificent temple of Khajuraho was built by the rulers: Chandela
 The monuments of 'Khajuraho' are found in: Madhya Pradesh
 Khajuraho temple architecture highlights the: Nagara style
 The Brihadishvara Temple is located in the state of: Tamil Nadu
 The Brihadishvara temple was built by: Rajaraja Chola
 The Kandaraya Mahadeva temple is related to the group: Khajuraho temples
 The Lingaraja temple was built by: Somvanshi king Yayati Keshari

Cave and Rock-Cut Architecture
 The period of construction of Ajanta caves is: Gupta period
 The ancient Hindu temple located in Maharashtra which is one of the largest rock-cut
temples is: Kailasa Temple of Ellora
 In India, Neolithic cave paintings are found in: Bhimbetka
 The famous Panchmukhi caves with prehistoric paintings are located in the district:
Sonbhadra



Buddhist Caves
 Karle, famous for its Buddhist caves, is located in: the state of Maharashtra

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 In the state of Maharashtra, there are protected Buddhist caves named 'Karla'.
 Karle, the best-preserved among the Buddhist caves, is in the state of: Maharashtra

Other Architecture and Sculptures
 The Sanchi Stupa was built by: Ashoka
 The Mathura School of Art reached its peak in: Kushana period
 In ancient history, above the 'anda' was a 'harmika', a balcony-like structure. A pole
emerged from the harmika, which was called: Yashti
 The innermost sanctum of Hindu and Jain temples, where the idol of the main deity of
the temple is placed is: Garbhagriha
 The popular temple architectural style in North India is called Nagara.
 Large statues of Kushana rulers have been found installed in a temple in Mat. This
state is: Uttar Pradesh
 The Buddhist temple located in India is: Mahabodhi Temple
 On the walls of the temples of Tiruvarur and Ajanta, Mural types of paintings are
present.
 Murudeshwara temple is located on Kanduka Giri in the state of: Karnataka
 Sanchi Stupa is located near the city of: Bhopal
 The Gomateshwara statue located in Shravanabelagola is made of: Granite
 The Aihole inscription is associated with the ruler: Pulakeshin II
 The balcony-like structure built in a stupa is called: Harmika
 The Pattachitra style of painting is the oldest and most popular art of the state of:
Odisha
 Name the monument which is a proof of successful renovation and preservation of an
archaeological site: Sanchi Stupa
 The king who built the Gangaikonda Cholapuram temple was: Rajendra Chola I

Temple Architecture

 A new style of temple architecture was created by a selective blend of the architectural
traditions of 'North Indian temple style' and 'South Indian temple style': Vesara style

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Dilwara Jain temple is: On the Aravalli mountain at Mount Abu
 The well-known Sun temple is built at: Konark
 The famous monuments of the Khajuraho group are in the state of: Madhya Pradesh
 The magnificent temple of Khajuraho was built by the rulers: Chandela
 Khajuraho temple architecture highlights the: Nagara style
 The Kandaraya Mahadeva temple dedicated to Lord Shiva was built by the Chandela
dynasty ruler Angadeva in approximately 999 CE.
 The Kandaraya Mahadeva temple is related to the group: Khajuraho temples
 The credit for the establishment of the famous Konark Sun temple is given to: King
Narasimhadeva I
 The temple called Black Pagoda by European sailors was: Konark Temple
 The famous Konark Sun Temple is located in: Odisha
 The Brihadishvara Temple is located in the state of: Tamil Nadu
 The Brihadishvara temple was built by: Rajaraja Chola
 The Brihadishvara Temple was made from: Granite
 Brihadishvara Temple was built to adorn the throne of the: Chola Empire
 The Lingaraja temple was built by: Somvanshi king Yayati Keshari
 Shri Lingaraja Temple is located in the city of: Bhubaneswar
 The Sun Temple located in Modhera was built by: Solanki dynasty
 The construction of Kailasanatha Temple of Kanchipuram was done by the rulers of
the Pallava dynasty.
 The part of a Hindu temple which has space for a large number of devotees is:
Mandapa
 The famous Sanchi Stupa was built by: Ashoka
 The Jagannath Temple of Puri was built by: Anantavarman Chodaganga
 The famous Somnath Temple is located in: Gujarat
 The Somnath Temple is located on the western coast of India in: Gujarat
 The marble temple built by Vimal Shah is: Dilwara Temple
 The Dilwara Temple of Mount Abu is dedicated to the deity: Adinatha
 Sabarimala Temple is located in: Kerala
 The Kamakhya Temple is located in the state of: Assam
 The temple located in the Elephanta Caves near Mumbai is dedicated to: Lord Shiva

Cave and Rock-Cut Architecture

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The period of construction of Ajanta caves is: Gupta period
 The ancient Hindu temple located in Maharashtra which is one of the largest rock-cut
temples is: Kailasa Temple of Ellora
 In India, Neolithic cave paintings are found in: Bhimbetka
 The famous Panchmukhi caves with prehistoric paintings are located in the district:
Sonbhadra
 The Udayagiri and Khandagiri caves are rock-cut caves located in: Odisha
 The Ajanta caves famous as a World Heritage Site are located in: Aurangabad
 The Ajanta caves are located in: Maharashtra
 The temples of Ellora were built by: The Rashtrakutas
 The Ajanta caves, which are about 30 rock-cut Buddhist caves, were how old: 2nd
century BCE
 The Ajanta and Ellora caves are located in the state of: Maharashtra
 The Ajanta and Ellora caves are among the finest examples of the earliest architecture,
cave painting and sculpture of the Buddhist religion.
Temples and Architecture
 The Chennakesava temple was built during the Hoysala empire.
 The group of monuments in Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu, was built by: The
Pallavas
 The Shore Temple is located in: Mahabalipuram
 The Kailasanatham temple in Kanchipuram was built during the reign of: The
Pallavas
 The Meenakshi Temple is located in: Madurai
 The Saptaratha temple of Mahabalipuram was built by: Narasimha Varman
 The Rath temples in Mahabalipuram were built by: The Pallavas
 The Thousand Pillar Temple was built by: Rudra Deva
 The temples of Bhubaneswar and Puri are built in the Nagara style.
 The Vishnu temple of Angkor Wat is located in: Cambodia
 The temple of Lord Ranganatha in South India is located on: Tirumala Hill
 The Chitragupta Swami Temple, which is considered the only temple of Chitragupta,
is located in: Kanchi
 The Konark temple in Orissa was built by: King Narasimha Deva I
 In temples of the Dravidian style, 'Gopuram' means: An ornate and multi-storied
building above the gateway

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Shravanabelagola is located in: Karnataka
 Govind Mahal, which is an unparalleled example of Hindu architecture, is located in:
Datia
 The Khajuraho temples were built by: The Chandellas
 The 'Konark' temple is related to: Sun
 The Shikhara built in Dravidian style is: Teli ka Mandir of Gwalior
 The architectural style of the Brihadishvara Temple located in Tamil Nadu is:
Dravidian
 In the Panchayatan style of architecture, there are 5 temples.
 The Shri Brahmapurishwara Temple is located in the state of: Tamil Nadu
 The high gates built in the courtyards of temples in South India were called: Gopuram
 The Hoysaleswara Temple was built from: Black schist stone
 The ancient temple dedicated to Bhima Devi is located in: Pinjore, Haryana
 The Govardhan Math is located in: Puri
 The famous Lingaraj Temple is located in the: Bhubaneswar district
 The Grishneshwar Jyotirlinga is located in Maharashtra.
 Rajrappa is located in the state of: Jharkhand

Caves and Rock-Cut Architecture
 The Khandagiri caves were excavated by King: Kharavela
 The global heritage site of Bhimbetka located in Madhya Pradesh is famous for: Rock
shelters
 The Bhimbetka caves are considered to be: 30,000 years old
 The caves and rock-cut temples in Ellora are of: Hindus, Buddhists and Jains
 The Ajanta and Ellora caves are in: Maharashtra
 The largest and most developed rock-cut Chaitya-griha of the Hinayana phase is
located in: Karle
 The center which has more than a hundred Buddhist caves is: Kanheri
 The rock-cut cave in which the depiction of Bodhisattva with eleven heads is found is:
Kanheri
 The cave famous for 'Trimurti' is: Elephanta
 The credit for the famous rock-cut temples of Elephanta is given to: The Pallavas
 The wonder of rock-cut architecture is considered to be: Kailasa Temple, Ellora

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The temple of Mahabalipuram was built by cutting rocks by: The Pallavas
 The place where the cave temples built by the Rashtrakutas in the Ellora hills are
located is: Aurangabad (Maharashtra)
 Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain rock-cut caves exist together in: Ellora
 The Ravan Phadi cave located in Karnataka is an example of the early Chalukya
style of architecture.
 The Bagh Caves, which have 9 Buddhist caves, located in Madhya Pradesh were
developed in the 6th century.
 The 7-meter high idol 'Sadashiva' representing the three faces of Lord Shiva is found in
the Elephanta cave.
 The Elephanta Caves are mainly dedicated to: Lord Shiva
 The Bagh Caves, which are a wonderful example of Indian rock-cut architecture, are
located in: Madhya Pradesh
 Borra Caves are a limestone cave in India located in: Andhra Pradesh
 The caves of Ellora have Buddhist, Hindu and Jain monasteries and temples.
 The popular rock-cut sculpture, 'Gangavataran' is found at the place
Mahabalipuram of India.

Other Arts and Architecture
 Gandhara art, a Buddhist visual art style, which flourished extensively in the empire
of Kushana during the first century BC and 4th century BC.
 The place of origin of the 'Tantric Yogini' sect is considered to be: Odisha
 The Ashoka Pillar in Delhi neither rusts nor corrodes because it is made of the metal:
Iron
 The place where the Varaha avatar of Vishnu is depicted in the sculpture is:
Udayagiri cave, Vidisha
 The name of the king mentioned in the iron pillar inscription of Mehrauli is:
Chandra
 The Somapura Mahavihara was built by: Dharmapala
 The Gandhara art style is a synthesis of: Indian and Greek art
 Among the four toranas of the Great Stupa of Sanchi, the Southern one was built
first.


<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


Stupas and Related Structures
 The Sanchi Stupa is located in the state of: Madhya Pradesh
 Related to the architecture of the Buddhist stupa is: Harmika
 The Maurya pillar capital was found in Sarnath, which is known as the Lion Capital.
 The stupa site that is not located in the state of Uttar Pradesh is: Bharhut
 'Milinda Panha' is in the form of a dialogue between King Milinda and a Buddhist
monk: Nagasena
 The Hoysaleswara Temple was built in 1150 by a Hoysala king.
 The 'Bhitargaon brick temple' is located in the state of: Uttar Pradesh
 The Indian state which is home to Buddhist cave temples, known as Barabar Caves, is:
Bihar
 The Ramabhar Stupa, the place where Lord Buddha was cremated, is located in the
state of: Uttar Pradesh
 The Nagarjuni caves were donated by the Mauryas to the Ajivika sect.
 The ancient temple dedicated to Bhima Devi is located in Pinjore, Haryana.
 The Kardam Monastery is located in the state of: Himachal Pradesh
 The Phodong Monastery is located in: Sikkim
 The famous Tawang Monastery is located in the state of: Arunachal Pradesh
 The Kamakhya Temple is located in: Guwahati
 The Dilwara Temple is related to: Jainism
 The Dilwara temples of Jainism are located in Mount Abu of India.
Temples and Architecture
 The Chennakesava temple was built during the Hoysala empire.
 The group of monuments in Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu, was built by: The
Pallavas
 The Shore Temple is located in: Mahabalipuram
 The Kailasanatham temple in Kanchipuram was built during the reign of: The
Pallavas
 The Meenakshi Temple is located in: Madurai
 The Saptaratha temple of Mahabalipuram was built by: Narasimha Varman
 The Rath temples in Mahabalipuram were built by: The Pallavas
 The Thousand Pillar Temple was built by: Rudra Deva

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The temples of Bhubaneswar and Puri are built in the Nagara style.
 The Vishnu temple of Angkor Wat is located in: Cambodia
 The temple of Lord Ranganatha in South India is located on: Tirumala Hill
 The Chitragupta Swami Temple, which is considered the only temple of Chitragupta,
is located in: Kanchi
 The Konark temple in Orissa was built by: King Narasimha Deva I
 In temples of the Dravidian style, 'Gopuram' means: An ornate and multi-storied
building above the gateway
 Shravanabelagola is located in: Karnataka
 Govind Mahal, which is an unparalleled example of Hindu architecture, is located in:
Datia
 The Khajuraho temples were built by: The Chandellas
 The 'Konark' temple is related to: Sun
 The Shikhara built in Dravidian style is: Teli ka Mandir of Gwalior
 The architectural style of the Brihadishvara Temple located in Tamil Nadu is:
Dravidian
 In the Panchayatan style of architecture, there are 5 temples.
 The Shri Brahmapurishwara Temple is located in the state of: Tamil Nadu
 The high gates built in the courtyards of temples in South India were called: Gopuram
 The Hoysaleswara Temple was built from: Black schist stone
 The ancient temple dedicated to Bhima Devi is located in: Pinjore, Haryana
 The Govardhan Math is located in: Puri
 The famous Lingaraj Temple is located in the: Bhubaneswar district
 The Grishneshwar Jyotirlinga is located in Maharashtra.
 Rajrappa is located in the state of: Jharkhand

Caves and Rock-Cut Architecture
 The Khandagiri caves were excavated by King: Kharavela
 The global heritage site of Bhimbetka located in Madhya Pradesh is famous for: Rock
shelters
 The Bhimbetka caves are considered to be: 30,000 years old
 The caves and rock-cut temples in Ellora are of: Hindus, Buddhists and Jains
 The Ajanta and Ellora caves are in: Maharashtra

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The largest and most developed rock-cut Chaitya-griha of the Hinayana phase is
located in: Karle
 The center which has more than a hundred Buddhist caves is: Kanheri
 The rock-cut cave in which the depiction of Bodhisattva with eleven heads is found is:
Kanheri
 The cave famous for 'Trimurti' is: Elephanta
 The credit for the famous rock-cut temples of Elephanta is given to: The Pallavas
 The wonder of rock-cut architecture is considered to be: Kailasa Temple, Ellora
 The temple of Mahabalipuram was built by cutting rocks by: The Pallavas
 The place where the cave temples built by the Rashtrakutas in the Ellora hills are
located is: Aurangabad (Maharashtra)
 Buddhist, Hindu, and Jain rock-cut caves exist together in: Ellora
 The Ravan Phadi cave located in Karnataka is an example of the early Chalukya
style of architecture.
 The Bagh Caves, which have 9 Buddhist caves, located in Madhya Pradesh were
developed in the 6th century.
 The 7-meter high idol 'Sadashiva' representing the three faces of Lord Shiva is found in
the Elephanta cave.
 The Elephanta Caves are mainly dedicated to: Lord Shiva
 The Bagh Caves, which are a wonderful example of Indian rock-cut architecture, are
located in: Madhya Pradesh
 Borra Caves are a limestone cave in India located in: Andhra Pradesh
 The caves of Ellora have Buddhist, Hindu and Jain monasteries and temples.
 The popular rock-cut sculpture, 'Gangavataran' is found at the place
Mahabalipuram of India.

Other Arts and Architecture
 Gandhara art, a Buddhist visual art style, which flourished extensively in the empire
of Kushana during the first century BC and 4th century BC.
 The place of origin of the 'Tantric Yogini' sect is considered to be: Odisha
 The Ashoka Pillar in Delhi neither rusts nor corrodes because it is made of the metal:
Iron

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The place where the Varaha avatar of Vishnu is depicted in the sculpture is:
Udayagiri cave, Vidisha
 The name of the king mentioned in the iron pillar inscription of Mehrauli is:
Chandra
 The Somapura Mahavihara was built by: Dharmapala
 The Gandhara art style is a synthesis of: Indian and Greek art
 Among the four toranas of the Great Stupa of Sanchi, the Southern one was built
first.

Stupas and Related Structures
 The Sanchi Stupa is located in the state of: Madhya Pradesh
 Related to the architecture of the Buddhist stupa is: Harmika
 The Maurya pillar capital was found in Sarnath, which is known as the Lion Capital.
 The stupa site that is not located in the state of Uttar Pradesh is: Bharhut

Other Historical Facts
 'Milinda Panha' is in the form of a dialogue between King Milinda and a Buddhist
monk: Nagasena
 The Hoysaleswara Temple was built in 1150 by a Hoysala king.
 The 'Bhitargaon brick temple' is located in the state of: Uttar Pradesh
 The Indian state which is home to Buddhist cave temples, known as Barabar Caves, is:
Bihar
 The Ramabhar Stupa, the place where Lord Buddha was cremated, is located in the
state of: Uttar Pradesh
 The Nagarjuni caves were donated by the Mauryas to the Ajivika sect.

Caves and Temples (Miscellaneous)
 The ancient temple dedicated to Bhima Devi is located in Pinjore, Haryana.
 The Kardam Monastery is located in the state of: Himachal Pradesh

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Phodong Monastery is located in: Sikkim
 The famous Tawang Monastery is located in the state of: Arunachal Pradesh
 The Kamakhya Temple is located in: Guwahati
 The Dilwara Temple is related to: Jainism
 The Dilwara temples of Jainism are located in Mount Abu of India.
 Konark Sun Temple: The world-famous Konark Sun Temple of Odisha was built by
Narasimhadeva I.
 Elephanta Caves: The Elephanta caves are in Mumbai.
 Mahabalipuram Temples: The famous name of the monolithic rock temples located
in Mahabalipuram is 'Rathas'.
 Pattadakal Monuments: The group of monuments located in Pattadakal is in
Karnataka.
 Bhimbetka Rock Shelters: The 'Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka' are located at the
foothills of the Vindhya Range.
 Chandragiri Fort: The Chandragiri Fort, a historical fort built in the 11th century, is
located in Andhra Pradesh.
 Angkor Wat Temple: The famous Vishnu temple of Angkor Wat located in
Cambodia was built by Suryavarman II.
 Gnana Saraswati Temple: The Gnana Saraswati Temple of South India is located in
Basar.
 Sanchi: Sanchi is a place belonging to the period between the 3rd century BCE and
12th century CE, famous for its excellent example of Buddhist art and architecture.
 Gandhara Style of Art: The Gandhara style of art in ancient India was developed by
the Kushana dynasty.
 Allahabad Pillar: A pillar with inscriptions from three different periods (Maurya,
Gupta, and Mughal) is located in Allahabad (Prayagraj).
 Dravidian Temple Architecture: The architecture of a temple of the Dravidian style
is represented by a 'Vimana'.
 Shiva Cave: The Shiva cave is located in Elephanta.
 Jigadh (Odisha): Located at 'Jigadh' in Odisha is Ashoka's Rock Edict site.
 Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves: The famous caves of Udayagiri and Khandagiri
are located in Odisha.
 Rajarajeshwar Temple: Charupallam, 'Village of Incline,' is located near the
Rajarajeshwar temple.
 Kailasa Temple: The Kailasa Temple has been built by the Rashtrakuta dynasty.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Kapileshwar Temple: The Kapileshwar temple located in Tamil Nadu is dedicated to
the Indian deity Shiva.
 Nishumbhasudini Devi Temple: The temple of Nishumbhasudini Devi was built by
the Cholas.
 Ajanta and Ellora Caves: The Ajanta and Ellora caves are located in the state of
Maharashtra.
 Mahishasuramardini Temple: The name of the famous and wonderful temple
located in Chaiturgarh Fort in Korba district of Chhattisgarh is Mahishasuramardini
Temple.
 Borobudur Temple: The world-famous Borobudur temple is located in Indonesia.
 Meenakshi Temple: The Meenakshi temple is located in the state of Tamil Nadu.
 Biraja, Rajarani, Samaleswari Temples: The Biraja Temple, Rajarani Temple, and
Samaleswari Temple are all located in Odisha.
 Five Rathas of Mahabalipuram: The name of the fifth Ratha among the five Rathas
in Mahabalipuram is Draupadi Ratha.
 Dharmaraja Ratha: The Dharmaraja Ratha monument is located in Mahabalipuram.
 Ranakpur Temple: The famous temple located in Ranakpur is a Jain temple.
 Kandariya Mahadeva Temple: The Kandariya Mahadeva Temple is located in
Khajuraho.
 Neemrana Baori: The ancient Neemrana Baori is located in the Alwar district of
Rajasthan.
 Charaka Samhita: Charaka Samhita is related to medicine.
 Sangam Literature: Tamil literature is famous as Sangam literature.
 Lilavati: The famous Sanskrit text Lilavati is written on the subject of mathematics.
 Malavikagnimitram: The book 'Malavikagnimitram' was written by Kalidasa.
 Abhijnanasakuntalam: The author of the book 'Abhijnanasakuntalam' is Kalidasa.
 Kadambari: The author of 'Kadambari' is Bana.
 Mudrarakshasa: The 'Mudrarakshasa' written by Vishakhadatta was written in the
Sanskrit language.
 Megasthenes, who wrote the famous book Indica about India, was originally from
Greece.
 The Battle of Kurukshetra described in the Mahabharata was fought for 18 days.
 The sixth of the eighteen parvas of the Indian epic Mahabharata (written by Vyasa)
which widely describes the Bhagavad Gita is the Bhishma Parva.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The name 'Bharat' is used as a title for India in the Indian Constitution which is
mentioned in a part of the Indian epic Mahabharata as the story of the ancient
mythological emperor 'Bharata'.
 The ancient Indian epic Mahabharata is known as the longest epic known to date, and
described as the longest epic ever written.
 The author of the Sanskrit epic named 'Mahabharata' was Maharishi Ved Vyasa.
 The original name of Mahabharata is Jaya Samhita.
 Kalidasa wrote his epic named Meghaduta in the Sanskrit language.
 The drama 'Vikramorvashiyam' describes the love story of Pururavas and Urvashi.
 The book 'Malavikagnimitram' was written by Kalidasa.
 The author of the book 'Abhijnanasakuntalam' is Kalidasa.
 Shakuntala's son in 'Abhijnanasakuntalam' written by Kalidasa was Bharata.
 The composition of Kumarasambhavam was done by Kalidasa.
 The Sanskrit drama 'Ratnavali' is believed to have been written in relation to the love
story of Princess Ratnavali by Harsha.
 Harshavardhana's Nagananda, a Sanskrit drama, describes the popular story of the
self-sacrifice of the Vidyadhara King Jimutavahana to save the Nagas.
 The 'Mudrarakshasa' drama was written by Vishakhadatta.
 'Mudrarakshasa' written by Vishakhadatta was written in the Sanskrit language.
 The famous Sanskrit drama 'Swapnavasavadattam' was written by Bhasa.
 The 'Dashakumaracharitam' or 'Tales of Ten Princes' was composed by Dandin.
 The author of Harshacharita is Bana.
 Charaka Samhita is related to medicine.
 'Sushruta Samhita' is related to medicine and surgery.
 Tamil literature is famous as Sangam literature.
 The famous Tamil epic Manimekalai was composed by Sattanar.
 The famous Sanskrit text Lilavati, is written on the subject of mathematics.
 The author of 'Kadambari' is Bana.
 Megasthenes, who wrote the famous book Indica about India, was originally from
Greece.
 The author of the book 'Indica' is Megasthenes.
 Gunadhya's Brihatkatha is written in the Paisachi language.
 Panini was a famous grammarian of Sanskrit.
 The author of the ancient Sanskrit text, Ashtadhyayi is Panini.
 The Natya Shastra book on classical dance of India was written by Bharata Muni.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The book written by Vishnu Sharma is Panchatantra.
 The book named Aryabhattiyam was written by Aryabhata in the Sanskrit language.
 The famous Sanskrit drama 'Swapnavasavadattam' was written by Bhasa.
 The original name of Mahabharata is Jaya Samhita.
 The 'Dashakumaracharitam' or 'Tales of Ten Princes' was composed by Dandin.
 The author of Harshacharita is Banabhatta.
 Gita Govinda was written by Jayadeva.
 'Kitab-ul-Hind' is the work of the traveler and scholar Al-Biruni.
 The ancient Indian philosopher who mentioned the minutest particle of matter and
named it- Atom was Kanada.
 The author of 'Indica' is Megasthenes.
 The Tamil poet 'Kamban' compiled the Tamil version of Ramayana.
 The author of the literary work named 'Mricchakatikam' was Shudraka.
 The Sangam period epics 'Silappadikaram' and 'Manimekalai' were written in the
Tamil language.
 Mahabharata is also called the 'fifth Veda'.
 'Raghuvamsham' was compiled by Kalidasa.
 The author of 'Panchatantra' is Vishnu Sharma.
 The author of Pancha-Siddhantika, Brihat-Samhita and Sankhya-Siddhanta is
Varahamihira.
 The compiler of the famous text named 'Tirukkural' is Tiruvalluvar.
 'Charaka Samhita' is related to the branch of medicine called Ayurveda.
 Sushruta is known as the Father of Indian Surgery.
 The 'Rajatarangini' describes the kings of the Kashmir state.
 The book Rajatarangini was written by Kalhana in ancient India.
 The ancient Indian legal document 'Manusmriti' was written in Sanskrit.
 Bhaskara was an Indian mathematician.
 Lilavati is a medieval Indian book written on the subject of mathematics.
 Manusmriti was translated into English by George Buhler.
 Harshacharitra, the biography of King Harshavardhana, was written by Banabhatta.
 Harshacharita, composed by Banabhatta, gives us correct information about Harsha
and his administration.
 In ancient times, a dictionary of words of the Sanskrit language was prepared by
Amarasimha, which was named 'Amarakosha'.
 The literary work 'Ratnavali' is the work of Harshavardhana.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The great literary works of India 'Meghaduta' and 'Abhijnanasakuntalam' were
composed by Kalidasa.
 The author of 'Rajatarangini' is Kalhana.
 Rishi Kapila is known as the founder of the Samkhya system of Hindu philosophy.
 The Sanskrit text 'Shuka Saptati' composed by Chintamani Bhatta was translated into
Persian and named 'Tutinama' by Khwaja Zia-ud-din Nakhshavi.
 The author of Mudrarakshasa was Vishakhadatta.
 Charaka Samhita is divided into 120 chapters and 8 sections.
 In Buddhist literature, 'Berigava' is related to the Khuddaka Nikaya.
 The author of Dashakumaracharitam was Dandin.
 The author of 'The Roots of Ancient India' was W.A. Fairservis.
 Kalhana's Rajatarangini was continued by Jonaraja and Shrivara.
 Kalhana was an author who wrote a Sanskrit poem about the kings of Kashmir.
 The author of 'Gita Govinda' is Jayadeva.
 The book on imaginary scientific instruments was written by Bhoja.
 The author of 'Gaudavaho' was Vakpati.
 The book Natural History was written by the Roman author Pliny the Elder.
 Megasthenes wrote 'Indica', which described India during the reign of the Mauryan
dynasty.
 Megasthenes' book Indica mentions 7 classes of Indian society.
 The court poet of Harshavardhana and author of 'Harshacharitra' was Banabhatta.
 The Prayaga Prashasti was composed in Sanskrit by Harishena.
 The two epics, 'Raghuvamsha' and 'Kumarasambhavam', are works composed by
Kalidasa.
 'Rajatarangini' is the work of Kalhana.
 The book 'Ashtadhyayi' written by the Sanskrit scholar Panini is related to grammar.
 The author of Si-yu-ki or 'The Records of the Western World' was Xuanzang.
 'Amuktamalyada' was written by Krishnadeva Raya.
 Al-Biruni's famous work 'Kitab-ul-Hind' is a composition in Arabic.
 Arthashastra was written by Chanakya.
 'Rajatarangini' is about the history of the Kashmir state.
 The subject of the book 'Rajatarangini' written in the 12th century AD was that it
gives the most detailed description of the history of Kashmir.
 The language of the text 'Vikramarjuna Vijaya' written by Pampa is Kannada.
 Meghaduta was composed by Kalidasa.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>



Religion, Philosophy, and Science
 The great lawgiver of ancient times was Manu.
 The great Jain scholar Hemachandra adorned the court of Kumarapala.
 The medieval scholar/author who was a follower of Jainism was Hemachandra Suri.
 The presiding deity of 'Bhojshala temple' is Goddess Saraswati.
 The successful jurist of medieval India was Vijnaneshwara.
 The Indian mathematician who discovered the decimal place value was Aryabhata.
 The social status given by Manu to foreigners in Indian society was that of the Fallen
Kshatriyas.
 Among the ancient Indian thinkers, Manu most systematically explained the legal
system.
 The text titled 'Manasollasa' was composed by Someshvara III.
 One of the most famous legal texts of ancient India, Manusmriti, was written in
Sanskrit.
 The Purva Mimamsa school of philosophy was founded in ancient India by Jaimini.
 'Mimamsa-Sutra' was written by Rishi Jaimini.
 Mahabharata was originally known as Jaya Samhita.
 Famous in the field of medicine was Charaka.
 There has been an important contribution in the field of medicine in ancient India by
Charaka's.
 The famous 'Banabhatta' known for his literary works became famous during the
reign of Harshavardhana.
 The drama 'Abhijnana Shakuntalam' written by Kalidasa is the love story of
Shakuntala and King Dushyanta.
 Ashvaghosha was the court poet of Kanishka.
 The theoretical foundation of Bharatanatyam is found in Natya Shastra.
 According to Tamil tradition, the assemblies of poets-known as 'Sangam', were held
at Madurai.
 In the early 12th century, Delhi was ruled by the Tomara dynasty.
 Hoshang Shah made Mandu their capital.
 The Chandela dynasty ruled Bundelkhand.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 Due to the betrayal of Jayachand, Prithviraj Chauhan was defeated. Later, Jayachand
was killed in the battle of Chandavar, 1194.
 The dynasty that did not rule the southern part of India is Rajput.
 The Pala Empire is related to the eastern part of India.
 The first ruler of the Pala dynasty was Gopala.
 The temples of Khajuraho were built during the reign of the Chandela dynasty.
 The Tower of Victory, Vijay Stambh, is located in Chittorgarh.
 Chittorgarh was the capital of the Sisodia dynasty.
 The renowned patron of literature, King Bhoja, was associated with the Paramara
dynasty.
 The founder of the 'Pratihara' dynasty was Harishchandra.
 Bhimdev Solanki II defeated Muhammad Ghori of the Ghorid dynasty near Mount
Abu in the village of Kayadara.
 A religion of India - Zoroastrianism - is mainly found in the state of Maharashtra.
 'Zend-Avesta' is associated with Zoroastrianism.
 Followers of the Jewish religion are Jews.
 Related to the Jewish religion is the Torah.
 One of the six schools of Indian philosophy is Yoga.
 In ancient times, a person was weighed against a commodity and the same amount of
that commodity was donated. This practice was called Tulabhara.
 The Jantar Mantar located in Delhi was built by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur.
 The Jantar Mantar built by Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh is an astronomical observatory.
 Maharaja Jai Singh II built Jantar Mantar in five cities.
 The Vikram Samvat calendar is 56-57 years ahead of the Gregorian calendar.
 Paper was invented by Cai Lun.
 The state of India that was known by the name Kamarupa in ancient times is Assam.
 Archaeologist B.B. Lal excavated Hastinapur in Meerut district in 1951-52.
 The name India came from the Greek language, which means 'the region beyond the
Indus River'.
 The Padmanabhaswamy Temple is located in the city of Thiruvananthapuram.
 The name India is derived from the Indus river.
 The main occupation of traders known as Seth, Sahukar, Mahajan, and Chetti from
ancient times is Banking.
 The concept of Snakes and ladders is based on superstitious beliefs.
 The first wheels were made of wood.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Pandavas first founded the city of Delhi and named it Indraprastha.
 The ancient kingdom of Kamarupa was located in the state of Assam.
 The first ruler of the Chandela dynasty was Nannuka.
 Vishnuvardhana, the first independent ruler of the Hoysala dynasty, made his capital
Dwarasamudra.
 The dynasties that were involved in the triangular struggle to establish dominance over
Kannauj were Pala, Pratihara, Rashtrakuta.
 The founder of Vikramshila University was Dharmapala.
 A queen of Govindachandra Gahadvala, Kumaradevi, built the Dharmachakra-Jin
Vihara at Sarnath.
 The religious ritual of 'Hiranyagarbha' was performed by Dantidurga.
 The followers of Ramanuja are called Vaishnavas.
 'Dwarasamudra' was the capital of the Hoysala dynasty.
 The founder of the Pala dynasty was Gopala.
 The capital of the Kadamba kings was Vanavasi.
 The author of many texts to expose the hypocrisy and corrupt behavior of
contemporary society was Kshemendra.
 The Chandela king whose other name was Lakshmanavarman was Yashovarman.
 The credit for starting a new era goes to Lakshmana Sena.
 The Chandela ruler who was not defeated by Mahmud of Ghazni was Vidyadhara.
 Jejakabhukti was the ancient name of Bundelkhand.
 Kalinga King Kharavela was related to the Chedi dynasty.
 Rana Kumbha wrote a treatise on music named Sangita-raja.
 The Indian painting style which has decorations of pure gold and precious stones and
depicts Hindu deities, especially Lord Krishna, is Thanjavur Painting.
 In Chittorgarh Fort of Rajasthan, 'chhatris' were built in honor of the warriors Jaimal
and Fatta, who sacrificed their lives during the siege of Emperor Akbar in the year
1568.
 D.C. Sircar published the Indian Epigraphy and Indian Epigraphical Glossary in the
year 1965-66.
 The iron implementation site of Hastinapur was found in the present state of Uttar
Pradesh.
 Inscriptions composed in praise of the kings of ancient India are known as Prashasti
inscriptions.
 The Parsi New Year is called Navroz.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 A very popular game in ancient India was Chess.
 The 13th-century traveler to India, Marco Polo, came from Italy.
 For the active contribution of Indian merchants, ancient travelers to the Indian
subcontinent such as Megasthenes, Faxian, Xuanzang, Al-Biruni, Ibn Battuta, etc.,
used the name Swarnabhumi.
 Al-Biruni came to India from Uzbekistan in the 11th century.
 The Bhoramdeo temple is located in the Chhattisgarh state, where "Bhoramdeo
Mahotsav" is celebrated every year in the last week of March.
 Forest kingdom is referred to as 'Atavika Rajya'.
 The capital of the Solanki dynasty was Anhilwad.
 The archaeological site from where two carbonized seeds of betel nut have been found
is Vatgal.
 According to the Puranas, the original place of the Chandravamshiya rulers was
Pratishthanapura.
 'What is here is elsewhere, what is not here is nowhere' is said in the Mahabharata.
 The ancient Svetambara Jain temple is located in Palitana (Gujarat).
 The institution related to foreign trade was Nanadeshi and Nagaram.
 The ruler who sent two maritime expeditions against Sinhala Dweep in 642 AD was
Narasimhavarman I.
 A special contribution in the field of algebra was made by Bhaskara.
 India's rank in terms of the number of World Heritage Sites is Seventh (currently
sixth).
 Located in Aurangabad, Maharashtra, is Ajanta Caves.
 The tax valid by Hindu law was one-sixth of the produce.
 The irrigation tax in ancient India was called Bidakabhagam.
 The commentator of Vedic texts, Sayana, was patronized by The Vijayanagara kings.
 The huge statue of Gomateshwara at Shravanabelagola was installed by Chamunda
Raya.
 An amphora jar is a tall jar with handles on both sides.
 The document named 'Khasra' refers to a revenue-related document.
 In the Assam region of India, 'Kamarupa' is an ancient name.
 Bhaskaravarman of the Varman dynasty ruled the Kamarupa region.
 The Odantapuri education center was located in the state of Bihar.
 The founder of the Pala dynasty was Gopala.
 The most famous Khajuraho temples were built during the Chandela dynasty.

<<<PAGE_BREAK>>>


 The Chahamana/Chauhan ruler was Prithviraj III, who was defeated in 1192 by an
Afghan ruler Sultan Muhammad Ghori.
 In the state of Madhya Pradesh, the structure of Bhojshala of the eleventh century has
been constructed under the patronage of the Parmara dynasty.
 Jaimal and Fatta were the warriors who were entrusted with the charge of defending
the fort of Chittor.
 Dhangadeva built the Kandariya Mahadev.
 Rajput men had to perform a ritual called 'Shaka' (or 'Saka') when defeat became
certain, which was their final battle from which they could not return.
 The Pratihara dynasty made Kannauj (Kanyakubja) their capital.
 The greatest ruler of the Pratihara dynasty was Mihira Bhoja.
 Prithviraj Chauhan married Samyukta, who was the daughter of his enemy
Jayachandra Gahadvala.
 The father of Prithviraj Chauhan was Someshwar Chauhan.
 The two major cities under the control of the Chahamanas were Delhi and Ajmer.
 Muhammad Ghori was defeated in 1191 by a Chauhan ruler.
 Delhi first became the capital under the Tomar Rajput ruler.
 The first Muslim to invade India was Muhammad bin Qasim.